=== PAGE 136 ===
Interpretação de Texto e Vocabulário – 
EFOMM 
Textos para as questões 1 – 5 
EXTRACT 1  
Japan’s shipyards remain intact after quake 
Japan’s major shipyards escaped the full impact of the March 
11 earthquake and tsunami that struck the northeastern coast of 
the country with full force. An official at the Japan Ship 
Exporters’ Association said the devastating natural disaster 
“will have no impact on future export ship orders at all”. 
Although several small shipyards in the quake-hit areas were 
affected, major Japanese shipyards that build large vessels for 
exports are concentrated in western Japan and remain intact, 
the official said. Mitsui Engineering & Shipbuilding sustained 
“slight material damages” in the company’s Kasai Center and 
Chiba Works but did not consider such slight damages would 
cause serious impact on operations. “The rotational schedule of 
interruption of power supply due to the earthquake may affect 
our operation at our works and subsidiaries. However, the 
degree of the impact is not known now,” the company said in a 
statement. Japanese export ship orders rose for the 15th 
consecutive month in February o a year-on-year basis. Japanese 
shipbuilders received orders for 277 export vessels – 259 bulk 
carriers, 10 oil tankers and eight general cargo vessels – in the 
April-February period. 
(Adapted from: www.australianmerchantnavy.com, March 
2011) 
EXTRACT 2 
Tsnunami Debris Expected on U.S. Shores in 3 Years 
The powerful tsunami triggered by the 9.0 Japanese earthquake 
destroyed coastal towns near Sendai, washing such things as 
houses and cars into the ocean. Projections of where this debris 
might head have been made at the international Pacific 
Research Center, university of Hawaii at Manoa. What their 
model predicts about the tsunami debris is that they first spread 
out eastward from the Japan Coast in the North Pacific 
Subtropical Gyre. In a year, the Papahanaumokuakea Marine 
National Monument will see pieces washing up on its shores; 
in two years, the remaining Hawaiian islands will see some 
effects; in three years, the plume will reach the US West Coast, 
dumping debris on Californian beaches and the beaches of 
British Columbia, Alaska, and Baja California. The debris will 
then drift into the famous floating junk yard, the North Pacific 
Garbage Patch, where it will wander around and break into 
smaller and smaller pieces. In five years, Hawaii shores can 
expect to see another barrage of debris that is stronger and 
longer-lasting than the first one. Much of the debris leaving the 
North Pacific Garbage Patch ends up on Hawaii’s reefs and 
beaches. These model projections will help to guide clean-up 
and tracking operations. 
Adapted from: www.geog.ucsb.edu, April 2011) 
1) (EFOMM 2011) Acoording to the first extract, it is correct 
to say that: 
a) Japanese shipyards that build large vessels were 
virtually unharmed by the impact of the tsunami.  
b) all Japanese shipyards are not located on the path of the 
tsunami. 
c) Japanese shipyards located on the path of the tsunami 
were slightly affected by the devastating waves.  
d) shipyards in northwestern Japan were the most affected 
by the earthquake and tsunami.  
e) the earthquake and tsunami will have a big impact on 
the Japanese shipyard industry over the next decade. 
2) (EFOMM 2011) Read the following piece from extract 1 
“The rotational schedule of interruption of power supply 
due to the earthquake may affect our operation at our works 
and subsidiaries.” It may be inferred that: 
a) Operations will be greatly affected by the constant 
interruption of power supply. 
b) The earthquake caused the interruption of power supply 
without any consequences to the operations.  
c) Some operations are expected to be affected by the 
interruption of power supply. d) Subsidiaries and works 
will benefit from the power supply due to the 
earthquake. 
d) Power supply was not affected by the earthquake and 
operations will continue. 
3) (EFOMM 2011) According to the following segment from 
the first extract: “Japanese export ship orders rose for the 
15th consecutive month in February on a year-on-year 
basis.” 
a) The information above is collected every 15 months.  
b) The passage investigates the decrease in the number or 
ship orders. 
c) The figures above were released before the tsunami.  
d) One can tell for sure that Japanese ship orders were 
decreasing just before the tsunami.  
e) Japanese ship orders have increased for over a year. 
4) (EFOMM 2011) According to the second extract, the 
model developed by the International Pacific Research 
Center intends to: 
a) predict the movement of tsunamis in the ocean.  
b) study the movement of litter in the ocean.  
c) indicate the amount of garbage dumped in the ocean. 
d) collect the Japanese tsunami debris to clean the ocean.  
e) spread the debris in the ocean after the tsunami. 
5) (EFOMM 2011) Extract 2 explains that the North Pacific 
Garbage Patch 
a) was formed after the Japanese tsunami.  
b) will reach the shores of the US West Coast. 
c) is formed by the garbage dumped on US shores. 
d) is formed by the accumulation of garbage in the ocean.  
e) releases debris that will eventually end up in Baja 
California. 
6) (EFOMM 2011) The initials V.I.P. _____________Very 
Important Person. 
a) means  
b) stand for 
c) are about 
d) describe  
e) accounts for 
7) (EFOMM 2011) Choose the word that completes the idea 
of the following statement correctly: 
“Michael is a _______ smoker. He smokes three packs of 
cigarettes a day.” 
a) Violent 
b) fierce  
c) big  
d) chain 
e) Strong 
 
 
 
136


=== PAGE 137 ===
Texto para as questões 8 – 11  
Shipping industry faces new risks, says Allianz. 
 
Increasing ship sizes, human error and the challenge of 
shipping in arctic waters are among the biggest risks facing the 
modern maritime industry, according to Allianz Global 
Corporate and Speciality. 
The challenge of shipping in arctic waters is among the biggest 
challenges facing the modern maritime industry, the report 
said. 
Marking 100 years since the sinking of Titanic, the insurers 
yesterday published a report which noted that, while the world 
commercial shipping fleet has trebled to over 100,000 vessels 
over that period, overall shipping loss rates have declined 
significantly. In 1912, they were one ship per 100 per year; in 
2009 they had fallen to one ship per 670 per year. 
Despite this, Safety and shipping 1912-2012: from Titanic to 
Costa Concordia, based on research from Cardiff University, 
said the industry faced several key challenges. These include 
the growing trend to ‘super-size’ ships and cost pressures 
which are forcing ship-owners to source crews from emerging 
economies where training standards can be inconsistent. 
Other emerging risks include reduced crew numbers, which can 
compromise safety and encourage human error, increasing 
bureaucracy on board ships and the increased threat of piracy 
in Somalia and elsewhere. The emergence of ‘ice shipping’ and 
its associated navigational and environmental complications 
also poses a risk, the report said. 
Dr Sven Gerhard, AGCS’s global product leader for hull & 
marine liabilities, said the industry needed to address the new 
risks facing them proactively. 
‘For example, ultra-large ships pose challenges for insurers due 
to their sheer size and value, while others raise concerns on 
structural integrity and failure. While scale alone does not 
make these ships riskier, the increased sizes introduce specific 
risks that need to be addressed, such as salvage and recovery 
considerations and emergency handling,’ he said. 
AGCS noted that, despite hundreds of years of improvements 
in safety, human error remained a challenge. According to the 
report, over 75% of marine losses can be attributed to a wide 
range of ‘human error’ factors, including fatigue, inadequate 
risk management and competitive pressures, as well as 
potential deficiencies in training and crewing levels. 
Dr Gerhard said: ‘As technological improvements reduce risk, 
so does the weakest link in the system – the human factor – 
become more important. This is where the industry should 
focus most closely, so that best practice risk management and a 
culture of safety becomes second nature across the world fleet.’ 
Allianz did, however, note that major accidents have often been 
the catalysts for key changes in maritime industry safety. In 
light of this, Dr Gerhard said the Costa Concordia disaster 
earlier this year was likely to be ‘no different’, regardless of the 
outcome of investigations into the incident itself. 
(The Actuary Newsdesk: Nick Mann 27/Mar 2012) 
8) (EFOMM 2012) According to Allianz Global Corporate 
and Speciality, the maritime industry has been facing 
emerging risks, the odd one out is: 
a) Incorrect decisions or improper lack of action aboard.  
b) Crew numbers have been thriving.  
c) Ultra large vessels are on the increase  
d) Robbery on the high seas.  
e) Red tape on board ships. 
9) (EFOMM 2012) In line 28:‘(…) facing them proactively.’, 
is the same as: 
a) Complying with the rules of safety.  
b) Keeping track of risks. 
c) Foreseeing difficulties.  
d) Putting off decisions. 
e) Making deals. 
10) (EFOMM 2012) In lines 46-47: ‘(…) major accidents have 
often been the catalysts for key changes(…)’, the 
underlined word can be replaced by: 
a) goads  
b) clogs  
c) obstructions  
d) troubles  
e) excuses 
11) (EFOMM 2012) What can be inferred from the text? 
a) Technology is the sole solution for casualties at sea.  
b) Improper lack of action is still a defiance. 
c) Ultra large vessels are not hazardous to navigation.  
d) Maritime industry has been collapsing.  
e) Mishaps seldom happen at sea. 
12) (EFOMM 2012) People who never think of other people’s 
feelings are very ___________________. 
a) Insensible 
b) impolite  
c) inconsiderate  
d) brutal 
e) sensitive 
Texto para as questões 13 e 14 
Royal Navy hands fishing boat to Yemen authorities in 
counter-piracy operation 
An elite team of Royal Marines stormed the fishing vessel 
on Friday, seizing it back from a gang of suspected Somali 
pirates. The pirates are believed to have stolen the fishing 
vessel in order to use it as a platform for launching hijack 
attempts on cargo ships and tankers in the Gulf of Aden. 
The return of the fishing vessel – known as a dhow – is part 
of the NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) crackdown 
on piracy in the seas around Somalia. Captain Gerry 
Northwood, who is heading the counter-piracy operation on 
board RFA Fort Victoria, said that he was pleased to return the 
dhow to her Yemeni owner. “This was a good example of 
Royal Navy and the Yemeni Navy working together for the 
common good of the local maritime community”, he said. “I 
was pleased that we were able to return the dhow to its rightful 
owner. It is important that through our cooperation with the 
Yemeni Navy, we reassure the local maritime community that 
we are able to protect their interests. They are as much the 
victims of Somali piracy as the larger international ships 
navigating through the area". The dhow was handed over to the 
137


